Skeleton
(C) 2002 Eric Ball

1. STORY

"You are in a maze of twisty passages, all alike" certainly 
describes the situation you are in.  

You hear faint footsteps, so you follow the sound through the 
maze.  To your horror, you discover the source of the footsteps 
is a Skeleton; and it doesn't look friendly.  Acting quickly, 
you blast it with your Undead Disintegrator and the Skeleton 
vanishes in a flash of colour.  But as you reload your UD, you 
hear footsteps again; and you wonder; are you the hunter or the 
hunted in this nightmare?

2. GAMEPLAY

NOTE: Skeleton is for one player only and sound is required.

The objective of Skeleton is to eliminate 80 Skeletons without 
being eliminated.  Use your Joystick Controller to manuver your 
way through the maze.  Press the red controller (fire) button 
to shoot your Undead Disintegrator at a Skeleton.  When a 
Skeleton is destroyed, another will take it's place.  Destroy 
ten Skeletons and you will enter the next maze.  Complete all 
eight mazes to win your freedom.  Touch or be touched by a 
Skeleton and the game is over.

Each new Skeleton is stronger than the previous and will 
require more hits from your Undead Disintegrator to be 
destroyed.  You are also not a dead shot with the Undead 
Disintegrator so sometimes a Skeleton will require more shots 
to be destroyed.  Although each new Skeleton starts moving 
slowly, the speed with which the Skeleton moves will gradually 
increase until it is destroyed.

Sound is critical for playing Skeleton.  The sound of the 
Skeleton's footsteps will get louder the closer the Skeleton is 
to you.  The sound will also be louder if the Skeleton is in 
front of you and quieter if the Skeleton is behind you.  If 
your ATARI Video Computer System is capable of producing stereo 
then you will be able to hear if the Skeleton is to the right 
or left of you as well.

3. USING THE CONTROLLERS 

Use your Joystick Controller with this ATARI Game Program 
cartridge. Be sure to plug the controller cables firmly into 
the jacks at the back of your Video Computer System game. Hold 
the controller with the red fire button to your upper left 
toward the television screen. Use the LEFT CONTROLLER jack for 
this one-player game. See Section 3 of your owner's manual for 
further details. 

Use the Joystick Controller to: 

- Move through the maze 
- Shoot your Undead Disintegrator

Push the Joystick forward to move forward, push the Joystick to 
the right to turn right and push the joystick to the left to 
turn left.  You must return the Joystick to the center before 
each move.

Press the red button to shoot your Undead Disintegrator.  You 
must release the red button to shoot again.  It requires one 
second to reload your Undead Disintegrator.

4. CONSOLE CONTROLS 

GAME SELECT SWITCH
GAME RESET SWITCH
Press down either the GAME SELECT or RESET switch to start the 
game.  Pressing either the GAME SELECT or RESET switch during 
the game has no effect.

TV TYPE SWITCH
DIFFICULTY SWITCHES
The TV TYPE and DIFFICULTY switches are not used in this game.

5. LEGAL STUFF

Permission is granted to distribute the ROM code for the Atari 
2600 game, Skeleton, provided that this text file is included 
with the code.  Skeleton may be included on websites and 
shareware or freeware compilations, but please contact Eric 
Ball first. 

The end user is granted permission to use the ROM code with an 
emulator, or to make a single cartridge for use with their 
Atari 2600 system, or use a RAM cartridge such as a Cuttle Cart 
or Supercharger if they have that capability.

Permission is NOT granted for any individual to manufacture or 
distribute cartridge versions of the ROM code for another end 
user under any circumstances.

Skeleton (C) 2002 Eric Ball, all other rights reserved
