Star Castle Arcade - The Development Story
==========================================

Every computer game has a story - this is the story of Star Castle Arcade for 
the Atari 2600.

STAR CASTLE ARCADE HISTORY

The original Star Castle arcade game was released in 1980 by Cinematronics.   
The game was designed by Tim Skelly and programmed by Scott Bodden.   Around 
14,000 Star Castle arcade cabinets were produced, and around 150 are known to 
still exist.    

Cinematronics are probably best known for producing the cartoon games Dragons 
Lair (1983) and Space Ace (1984).   They are also well known among arcade fans 
for their earlier arcade games using vector display technology.    During the 
vector era, from 1978 through 1983, Cinematronics released 15 arcade games 
using vector display technology, including classics such as Rip Off, Armor 
Attack, and of course Star Castle.    All of these games had nearly identical 
circuitry, and relied on clever programming to adapt it to the requirements of 
each game.

With vector display technology, shapes are drawn directly on the tube by the 
electron gun.   This gives vector games a very distinctive appearance, as the 
game objects have essentially unlimited resolution.   The games have a crisp 
analogue appearance, with smooth rotation and no jagged edges.   Unfortunately 
vector display technology cannot easily show colour, so games like Star Castle 
rely on colour overlays fixed to the front of the screen.   

Vector games require an expensive tube and suffer from visible flicker when 
many objects are drawn on the screen.   As a result, vector display technology 
in the arcades was quickly replaced by raster-scan technology, which itself is 
now being rapidly made obsolete by digital LED/LCD display technology.   For 
Cinematronics, the vector era came to an end in 1983, and after a lengthy 
bankruptcy the company was dismantled in 1987.

The story of Star Castle on the Atari 2600 VCS begins in 1981 with Howard Scott 
Warshaw.  While working for Atari, he was assigned the task of producing a 
conversion of Star Castle for the VCS.   But he soon decided that a straight 
port of the game would not be possible.   Instead, he was inspired to write 
Yars' Revenge, which has some visual similarities to Star Castle, but very 
different game-play.   The story of Star Castle on the VCS would end at this 
point were it not for the efforts of enthusiasts nearly 30 years later.

STAR CASTLE ON THE VCS

The Atari 2600 VCS has a large catalogue of arcade ports, but there are also 
many gaps where arcade games did not make it to the VCS.  Some of these ports 
were planned for release on the VCS, but abandoned during the video game crash 
of 1983.   A few of these arcade ports have since been unearthed as partially 
completed prototypes (e.g. Turbo and Ixion), while others (e.g. Zoo Keeper) 
remain as rumours based on magazine articles and press releases.  For games 
like Star Castle and Tempest, porting was simply deemed too technically 
challenging for the VCS and a direct port was not attempted.

The VCS still has a large community of followers, some of whom write games for 
the console.    These are enthusiasts who spend countless hours of their spare 
time to keep the VCS console alive, long after its commercial shelf life has 
expired.  Thanks to the Internet, and the AtariAge website in particular, these 
enthusiasts often work together, though many of them will likely never meet in 
real life.   Some are interested in filling the gaps in VCS catalogue and have 
ported missing arcade titles, such as Ladybug, Star Fire, Colony 7, Juno First, 
etc.  

Porting an arcade title to the VCS is not a straightforward task.  The VCS is 
a very limited platform and the arcade machines have many times more processing 
power.   A port generally takes a minimum of a year of effort to complete.    
The key to a successful port is capturing the essence of the arcade game within 
the limitations of the VCS.   For Star Castle Arcade, the VCS is incapable of 
vector graphics, but flicker is used cleverly in places to give the game the 
look and feel of vectors.

STAR CASTLE HOMEBREWS

The first enthusiast-driven attempt to port across Star Castle to the VCS was 
announced by Trogdor in December 2005, called Stellar Fortress.   His version 
used low resolution playfield graphics to draw the rings.   New features were 
added up to May 2008 but sadly the game was never fully playable and Trogdor 
moved on to other projects.

In August 2008, John Payson posted a demo to his blog showing that the rings 
could be drawn using high resolution sprite graphics.  However, he did not 
develop the demo further and moved on to other projects.  Many of the 
techniques that were eventually used in Star Castle Arcade, such as the multi-
colored rings, were inspired by this demo.

The next attempt was in 2009 by D. Scott Williamson, a former Atari Lynx 
programmer.   He was inspired to attempt the port, based on the story of Yars' 
Revenge in the book Racing the Beam (2009).  He worked in secret for 
around a year, finally revealing the completed game at the 2010 Video Game 
Summit in Chicago.   However, he did not plan to release the game to the 
community at this point, and encouraged other programmers to replicate his feat.

A further demo of Star Castle on the VCS was posted to an AtariAge blog by 
Thomas Jentzsch in July 2010.   He determined how D. Scott had 
written his port, and reverse-engineered the ring-drawing technique, based 
purely on video footage.   However, this was just for technical curiosity and 
he did not intend to produce a full port at that time.

The final attempt at a Star Castle port was started by Chris Walton in 
December 2011.   He was also interested in the technical challenge and produced 
a quick demo, inspired by the previous efforts.   The ring drawing code was 
completed in around a week, and a demo posted to his AtariAge blog.   He did 
not intend to attempt a complete port, but the community response was so 
encouraging that he continued with the project.

Over the next few months, the core game was completed and a playable version 
was uploaded to the AtariAge website in March 2012.   Chris Walton was assisted 
by Nathan Strum, who provided the game graphics, Ivan Machado who produced the 
game sound effects, and Richard 'Kulor' Armijo who supplied the title music.
The two version of Star Castle are rather different: D. Scott kept 
within the 8K limitation common to Atari VCS games of that time.  Chris  
used 28K and extra RAM to include features such as multi-coloured rings, 
explosion effects, title music, a splash screen, and a high-score table.   

In May 2012, D. Scott decided to start a Kickstarter project, so 
that his game could see a limited release to the community.   The response was 
very enthusiastic, and the funding goal was quickly reached.   He used the 
funding to build custom circuitry and cases for the game, and released the 
game to several hundred backers a few months later.

At this point, Chris was close to completing his own Star Castle arcade 
port, but there were blockers both technically and in real-life.   He had 
changed to a more challenging job, and the birth of his daughter was imminent, 
so he had little spare time to work on the game.   Also, the game had reached 
the timing limits of the VCS and it did not seem possible to provide the game 
with perfect collision detection.   Fortunately, at this point Thomas Jentzsch 
stepped-in and agreed to take over the programming of the game.

Together with Andrew Davie, Thomas had previously worked on a novel 
time-slicing technique for the Boulderdash VCS port.   This technique would 
be perfect to overcome the timing limits that were affecting Star Castle.   
Most VCS games perform all of their calculations on every frame, 60 times a 
second.   With time-slicing, the game calculations may be spread across several 
frames.   However, using this technique would require an almost complete 
rewrite of the Star Castle game code. 

Undeterred by the effort required, Thomas spent the next year 
reworking Star Castle to use an improved version of his time-slicing technique.   
An added bonus of using time-slicing was that it allowed him to include many 
more features from the arcade version.   The end result was a very close match 
to the arcade version, and so the game was named "Star Castle Arcade".

The story of Star Castle on the VCS ends at this point.   There are now two 
complete VCS ports, quite different from each other.   The Star Castle Arcade 
port took nearly 3 years to complete and was a truly international 
collaboration:   The game code was written by Chris Walton from Scotland, and 
Thomas Jentzsch from Germany.   The game graphics were supplied by Nathan Strum 
from the USA.  The sound effects were devised by Ivan Machado from Brazil.   
The Melody Cartridge on which the game is stored was designed and built by 
Fred Quimby from the USA.   Finally, the game was packaged and released by 
Albert Yarusso, the owner of the AtariAge website, also in the USA.   Together, 
this group is known as Team Antonym.

--

Stellar Fortress - http://atariage.com/forums/topic/80748-stellar-fortress/

John Payson Demo - http://atariage.com/forums/blog/142/entry-5136-star-castle-anyone/

Thomas Jentzsch Demo - http://atariage.com/forums/blog/144/entry-7275-star-castle-brainstorming/

Chris Walton Demo - http://atariage.com/forums/blog/107/entry-8769-star-castle-kernel/

Kickstarter - http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/698159145/atari-2600-star-castle

